Task29 — Dense rewrite of conditional-regime hot path

Goal

Reduce the runtime of conditional-regime-analyze by optimizing its dominant
CPU hot path identified in Task28:

    expandResidualLabels / euclideanDistance

Task28 profiling shows that this map-based path accounts for approximately
73% of conditional-regime-analyze CPU time. The current extrapolated
production runtime at -permutations 1000 is ~41.9 hours.

The purpose of this task is to determine how much of that cost can be removed
by replacing map-based distance computation with a dense representation,
without changing the algorithm, statistical procedure, or output semantics.

Do NOT perform a broader algorithmic rewrite.


Phase 1 — Audit the current hot path

Before changing code:

1. Inspect expandResidualLabels and euclideanDistance and document:
   - the data structures passed to euclideanDistance;
   - how feature/token dimensions are represented;
   - how often distances are evaluated;
   - whether maps are repeatedly traversed or looked up in the inner loop;
   - whether dimensions/keys are stable across distance calculations;
   - allocations attributable to this path.

2. Capture a reproducible reduced-scale baseline:
   - wall time;
   - CPU profile;
   - allocation profile;
   - relevant profiling counters;
   - exact command line and input data.

Choose a scale large enough that the hot-path proportions are representative,
but small enough that before/after validation can be repeated conveniently.
Target roughly 10–30 minutes if practical.

Do not use the full -permutations 1000 production run for iterative validation.


Phase 2 — Dense representation

Implement the smallest justified change that removes map lookup/traversal from
the distance-computation inner loop.

Preferred conceptual representation:

    map[feature]float64
        ->
    []float64

or an equivalent dense indexed representation.

Requirements:

1. Establish one deterministic feature -> dense-index mapping appropriate to
   the lifetime of the data being compared.

2. Convert/reuse data so euclideanDistance operates directly on dense numeric
   arrays/slices.

3. Avoid rebuilding dense representations inside the innermost distance loop.

4. Avoid introducing per-distance allocations.

5. Preserve the existing numerical calculation and algorithm.

6. Do NOT change:
   - clustering semantics;
   - residual-label expansion semantics;
   - permutation procedure;
   - statistical tests;
   - thresholds;
   - randomization;
   - output format;
   - unrelated code.

7. Do not introduce GPU/CUDA code in this task.

If a completely dense representation would materially increase memory usage,
use the smallest equivalent indexed representation that eliminates the
map-based inner-loop bottleneck and document the tradeoff.


Phase 3 — Correctness validation

Validate the implementation against the Task29 baseline.

Required:

- build succeeds;
- go vet succeeds;
- existing tests succeed;
- race tests succeed where applicable;
- deterministic/reduced-scale runs produce identical output.

Prefer byte-identical output.

If floating-point evaluation order necessarily changes and byte-identical
output cannot be preserved, STOP before accepting the optimization and report
the discrepancy. Do not silently introduce tolerance-based equivalence unless
explicitly justified and approved.


Phase 4 — Performance validation

Repeat the exact baseline workload after the change.

Report before/after:

1. wall time;
2. total CPU profile;
3. expandResidualLabels CPU contribution;
4. euclideanDistance CPU contribution;
5. allocations / allocated bytes;
6. peak and/or live memory if useful;
7. time spent converting map/sparse data into the dense representation.

Calculate:

    speedup of euclideanDistance
    speedup of expandResidualLabels
    speedup of conditional-regime-analyze overall

Use the measured reduced-scale result to provide a conservative estimate for:

    conditional-regime-analyze -permutations 1000

Compare this estimate with the Task28 baseline of ~41.9 hours.


Phase 5 — Re-profile, don't speculate

After the dense rewrite, identify the new dominant CPU consumers.

The report must answer:

1. Did map/hash lookup account for most of the previous ~73% hot-path cost?

2. How much production wall time is the dense rewrite expected to save?

3. What now dominates conditional-regime-analyze?

4. Is euclideanDistance still a sufficiently large and sufficiently dense
   numerical kernel that GPU/SIMD acceleration is worth investigating?

5. If further optimization is justified, identify the single highest-leverage
   next target, but DO NOT implement it in Task29.


Expected report

Update PERFORMANCE_AUDIT.md and PERFORMANCE_REFACTOR_REPORT.md.

Include a compact before/after table containing at minimum:

Metric                                  Task28 baseline    Task29 dense
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
benchmark wall time                     ...                ...
expandResidualLabels CPU                ...                ...
euclideanDistance CPU                   ...                ...
allocations / bytes                     ...                ...
peak/live memory                        ...                ...
estimated 1000-permutation runtime      ~41.9 h            ...
output equivalence                      baseline           ...

Also report the exact benchmark commands so the measurements can be reproduced.


Constraints

- Optimize only the identified conditional-regime hot path.
- Preserve behavior and output.
- No algorithmic/statistical changes.
- No GPU implementation.
- No unrelated refactoring.
- Do not run a ~42-hour full production validation merely to prove the
  optimization; use profiling plus a representative reduced-scale workload.
- If the proposed dense representation turns out not to be appropriate after
  inspecting the actual data structures, document why and implement only an
  equivalent minimal optimization that removes the demonstrated map-based
  bottleneck.
- If profiling disproves the Task28 hypothesis, report that result rather than
  forcing the planned rewrite.


Definition of Done

Task29 is complete when:

1. The map-based distance hot path has either been replaced by a validated
   dense/indexed implementation or demonstrated not to benefit from one.

2. Output equivalence has been verified.

3. Before/after CPU, allocation, memory, and wall-time measurements exist.

4. A new production runtime estimate is provided.

5. The post-change profile identifies the next dominant bottleneck.

6. The repository builds, vets, and tests cleanly.

7. No optimization beyond the Task29 scope has been implemented.
